Document alerting (#2570)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/overview/observability/alerting/_index.md

---
title: "Alerting with the Observability Platform"
linkTitle: Alerting
description: Documentation on the observability-platform alerting concept and architecture deployed and maintained by Giant Swarm.
weight: 80
menu:
  principal:
    identifier: overview-observability-alerting
    parent: overview-observability
user_questions:
  - How is alerting managed by the observability platform?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
last_review_date: 2025-04-24
---

Alerting is an important concept of any observability solution and it's thus only natural that it is available as part of the Giant Swarm Observability Platform. For more details and information on alerting please visit the [official Grafana documentation page](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/).

## How alerting works

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Alerting is usually divided into two distinct concepts: the alerting pipeline (how to send alerts, to whom and what to send) and alerting/recording rules (what to alert on). This documentation will cover how those two topics work in the Observability Platform.

```

As our alerting pipeline supports multi-tenancy, we strongly advocate that you first familiarize yourself with our [multi-tenancy]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/multi-tenancy/" >}}) concept.

### The alerting pipeline

![alerting pipeline](./alerting-pipeline.png)

> As you can see on the image above, the alerting pipeline is quite straightforward. The Loki and Mimir rulers evaluates alerting rules and send alerts to the Mimir Alertmanager. The Mimir Alertmanager (a multi-tenant aware Alertmanager) routes those alerts to configured receivers.
> 
> If you want to learn how to configure Alertmanager for your tenants, please, refer to our [dedicated documentation]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/alerting/configure-alertmanager" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see in the image above, the alerting pipeline is quite straightforward. The Loki and Mimir rulers evaluate alerting rules and send alerts to the Mimir Alertmanager. The Mimir Alertmanager (a multi-tenant aware Alertmanager) routes those alerts to configured receivers.

If you want to learn how to configure Alertmanager for your tenants, please refer to our [dedicated documentation]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/alerting/configure-alertmanager" >}}).
```

---
title: "Alerting with the Observability Plaform"
linkTitle: Alerting
description: Documentation on the observability-platform alerting concept and architecture deployed and maintained by Giant Swarm.
weight: 80
menu:
  principal:
    identifier: overview-observability-alerting
    parent: overview-observability
user_questions:
  - How is alerting managed by the observability platform?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
last_review_date: 2025-04-24
---

> Alerting is an important concept of any observability solution and it's thus only natural that it is included and managed as part of the Giant Swarm Observability Platform. For more details and information on alerting please visit the [official documentation page](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/).

Author: ```suggestion
Alerting is an important concept of any observability solution and it's thus only natural that it is available as part of the Giant Swarm Observability Platform. For more details and information on alerting please visit the [official documentation page](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/).
```

> Alerting is usually divided into two distinct concepts: the alerting pipeline (how to send alerts, to whom and what to send) and alerting/recording rules (what to alert on). This documentation will cover how those two topics work in the Observability Platform.

Reviewer 2: You coud add this to the "How alerting works" section. Directly above the multi-tenancy reference. I think it makes sense having both together in that subchapter.

> Alerting is usually divided into two distinct concepts, the alerting pipeline (how to send alert, to who and what to send) and alerting/recording rules (what to alert on). This documentation will cover how those two topics work in the Observability Platform.

Author: ```suggestion
Alerting is usually divided into two distinct concepts, the alerting pipeline (how to send alerts, to who and what to send) and alerting/recording rules (what to alert on). This documentation will cover how those two topics work in the Observability Platform.
```

## How alerting works

As our alerting pipeline supports multi-tenancy, we strongly advocate that you first familiarize yourself with our [multi-tenancy]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/multi-tenancy/" >}}) concept.

### The alerting pipeline

![alerting pipeline](./alerting-pipeline.png)

As you can see on the image above, the alerting pipeline is quite straightforward. The Loki and Mimir rulers evaluates alerting rules and send alerts to the Mimir Alertmanager. The Mimir Alertmanager (a multi-tenant aware Alertmanager) routes those alerts to configured receivers.

If you want to learn how to configure Alertmanager for your tenants, please, refer to our [dedicated documentation]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/alerting/configure-alertmanager" >}}).

### Loading alerting and recording rules

![loading recording and alerting rules](./alerting-loading-rules.png)

> The Observability Platform allows you to create and load both alerting and recording rules into the rules. It supports both *metric-based* alerts via the Mimir ruler and *log-based* alerts via the Loki ruler.

Author: Well the last rules should actually bé rulers instead

> The Observability Platform allows you to create and load both alerting and recording rules into the rules. It supports both *metric-based* alerts via the Mimir ruler and *log-based* alerts via the Loki ruler.

Author: I think we could rephrase it with bullet points instead

> The Observability Platform allows you to create and load both alerting and recording rules into the rules. It supports both *metric-based* alerts via the Mimir ruler and *log-based* alerts via the Loki ruler.

Author: ```suggestion
The Observability Platform allows you to create and load both alerting and recording rules into:

- the Mimir ruler (*metric-based* alerts)
- the Loki ruler (*log-based alerts)
```

> The Observability Platform allows you to create and load both alerting and recording rules into the rules. It supports both *metric-based* alerts via the Mimir ruler and *log-based* alerts via the Loki ruler.

Author: Wdyt about this?

> To be able to load alerts into them, we use our alloy agents, which means that rules can be loaded from both management cluster and workload clusters alike.

Author: ```suggestion
Alerting and recording rules can be loaded from both management cluster and workload clusters alike via our Grafana Alloy agents.
```

> If you want to learn how to configure your own alerts, please, refer to our [dedicated documentation]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/alerting/configure-alertmanager" >}}).

Author: Maybe we should just use 'If you want to learn how to configure your own, please'

You're right that I use alerting rules and alerts interchangeably

> If you want to learn how to configure your own alerts, please, refer to our [dedicated documentation]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/alerting/configure-alertmanager" >}}).

Author: ```suggestion
If you want to learn how to configure your own, please, refer to our [dedicated documentation]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/alerting/configure-alertmanager" >}}).
```

> ## Access to the alerting pipeline

Reviewer 2: It's not just the alerting pipeline that's visible there, since there's also the alerting rules and with the state of the alerting rules the alerts triggered. So it's a general Alerting UI, right? 
So maybe something like 
```suggestion
## Alerting Overview in Grafana
```

If you want to see how your alerting pipeline and your rules are configured for a tenant, you should access the *Alerting* section of your [installation's Grafana]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/data-exploration/accessing-grafana/" >}})

> ![grafana-alerting](./grafana-alerting.png)

Author: ```suggestion
![Grafana alerting section](./grafana-alerting.png)
```

In this section, you have access to various features such as:

> - __Alerts rules__: all (alerts and recording) rules currently available, which can be filtered by state (e.g. firing, pending). When unfolding an alert rule you can use the *see graph* link to jump to an explore page with the alert’s expression pre-filled.

Author: ```suggestion
- __Alerts rules__: all (alerts and recording) rules currently available, which can be filtered by state like firing or pending. When unfolding an alert rule you can use the *see graph* link to jump to an explore page with the alert’s expression pre-filled.
```

- __Contact points__: configured integrations (for example opsgenie or slack) to send alerts to, along with notification templates used to format alerts when sent out.

> - __Notification policies__: alerts routing which defines how alerts are sent to contact points based on matching criteria (e.g. severity=page).

Author: ```suggestion
- __Notification policies__: alerts routing which defines how alerts are sent to contact points based on matching criteria.
```

- __Silences__: silences currently loaded and their state along with the affected alerts.

> - __Active notifications__: currently firing alerts. It might be confusing with the *Alerts rules* page at first, but this page differs in the fact that it only shows alert currently firing, along with this it shows the notification state (e.g. unprocessed, suppressed, active).

Author: ```suggestion
- __Active notifications__: currently firing alerts. It might be confusing with the *Alerts rules* page at first, but this page differs in the fact that it only shows alert currently firing, along with this it shows the notification state.
```

---
title: "Alerting with the Observability Platform"
linkTitle: Alerting
description: Documentation on the observability-platform alerting concept and architecture deployed and maintained by Giant Swarm.
weight: 80
menu:
  principal:
    identifier: overview-observability-alerting
    parent: overview-observability
user_questions:
  - How is alerting managed by the observability platform?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
last_review_date: 2025-04-24
---

Alerting is an important concept of any observability solution and it's thus only natural that it is available as part of the Giant Swarm Observability Platform. For more details and information on alerting please visit the [official Grafana documentation page](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/).

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
